MDMA therapy is not approved by most medical regulators. But underground use is popular despite a severe lack of adequate practical guidance. Thus, I provide comprehensive practical guidance for MDMA therapy based on critical literature synthesis, personal experience, community reports, and a mechanistic framework. I primarily address the individual doing or seeking MDMA therapy while also discussing certain aspects mostly of interest to practitioners and researchers. With this manual I aim to improve the appeal, safety, and efficacy of MDMA therapy through scientific rigor, comprehensiveness, transparency, and respect for autonomy. 

These ideas are grounded in a theoretical model based on frameworks of memory reconsolidation, predictive processing, complex system dynamics, and the defense cascade model of autonomic threat responses. I use this to explain how many mental illnesses work, how MDMA therapy works, why destabilization exists, and how to navigate the long-term healing process. I argue that MDMA therapy durably improves many mental illnesses and stuck emotional reactions and beliefs through the unlearning, or reconsolidation, of inaccurate mental models. It reconsolidates all stuck mental models that are activated---and which you stay present with---during the session.

Practical guidance contains evidence-based discussion of safety, session preparation, the session itself, troubleshooting, between-session healing, and how that all fits into the longer-term healing journey. I also extend MDMA therapy beyond clinical mental illness to mental models that inhibit healthy community relationships, cognitive flexibility, and ethical reasoning. The tradeoffs between practitioner- versus self-guidance and instructions on how to find skilled, ethical, and well-matched practitioners are included.

This is the first MDMA/psychedelic therapy manual to explain and justify its recommendations based on a mechanistic theory of mental illness and healing while providing reasons for both confidence and skepticism of its claims.